# Container Query Proposal & Explainer

## Authors

- Miriam Suzanne

## Participate

The CSSWG has resolved to begin moving this proposal
into the CSS specification,
as part of the
[CSS Containment Module level 3](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain-3/).
(So far, that's an empty document. I'm working on it.)

Please leave any feedback on the CSSWG issues for this proposal:

- [Fleshing out @container queries with single-axis containment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5796)
- [Single-axis containment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031)
- [Request for TAG review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/592)

More specific issues for discussion:

- ["container width" and "container height" units](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5888)
- [`srcset` and `sizes` interaction with container queries](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5889)

Implementations:

- [Chromium](https://crbug.com/1145970) --
  in Chrome Canary, go to `chrome://flags` & "Enable CSS Container Queries"
  (This is a draft prototype and may not match the final design.
  I use syntax in this document that is not yet supported in the prototype.)

Demos & Articles:

- [My collection of codepen demos](https://codepen.io/collection/XQrgJo)

This Document:

- [On github](https://github.com/oddbird/css-sandbox/blob/main/src/rwd/query/explainer.md)
- [On css.OddBird.net](https://css.oddbird.net/rwd/query/explainer/)
- Typos or other
  [issues can be reported in github](https://github.com/oddbird/css-sandbox/issues)

## Table of contents

<!-- generated by VSCode Markdown All-In-One extension -->

- [Authors](#authors)
- [Participate](#participate)
- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Goals](#goals)
- [Non-goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposed Solutions](#proposed-solutions)
  - [Single-axis containment (`inline-size` & related values)](#single-axis-containment-inline-size--related-values)
  - [Containment context](#containment-context)
  - [Container queries (`@container`)](#container-queries-container)
    - [Container features](#container-features)
    - [Container query list](#container-query-list)
- [Key scenarios](#key-scenarios)
  - [Modular components in any container](#modular-components-in-any-container)
  - [Components with internal containers](#components-with-internal-containers)
  - [Component in a responsive grid track](#component-in-a-responsive-grid-track)
  - [Combining media & container queries](#combining-media--container-queries)
- [Detailed design discussion & alternatives](#detailed-design-discussion--alternatives)
  - [Single-axis containment issues](#single-axis-containment-issues)
  - [Implicit vs explicit containers](#implicit-vs-explicit-containers)
  - [Combining scope with container queries](#combining-scope-with-container-queries)
  - [@-Rule or pseudo-class?](#-rule-or-pseudo-class)
  - [Other questions to explore](#other-questions-to-explore)
- [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder-feedback--opposition)
- [References & acknowledgements](#references--acknowledgements)
- [Changelog](#changelog)
  - [2021.03.26](#20210326)
  - [2021.01.29](#20210129)

## Introduction

Media-queries allow an author to make style changes
based on the overall viewport dimensions --
but in many cases,
authors would prefer styling modular components
based on their context and available space within a layout.
Earlier this year,
David Baron & Brian Kardell
proposed two complementary approaches to explore:
a [`@container` rule][dbaron-cq],
and a [`switch()`][switch] function.
Both could be useful in different cases.

[dbaron-cq]: https://github.com/dbaron/container-queries-implementability
[switch]: https://bkardell.com/blog/AllThemSwitches.html

This proposal builds on David Baron's `@container` approach,
which works by applying size & layout containment
to the queried elements.
Any element with both size & layout containment
can be queried using a new `@container` rule,
with similar syntax to existing media-queries.
Currently, size containment is all-or-nothing.
In order to make that less restrictive for authors,
I'm also proposing `inline-size` & `block-size` values
for the `contain` property.

This is an early outline
of the feature as I imagine it in the abstract --
but there are a number of questions
that could only be resolved with a prototype.
The purpose of this document
is to outline a direction for more testing & exploration.

## Goals

Often the layout of a page
involves different "container" areas --
such as sidebars and main content areas --
and then component parts that
can be placed in any area.
Those components can be complex (a full calendar widget)
or fairly simple (heading typography),
but should respond in some way to the size of the container.

This can happen at multiple levels of layout --
even inside nested components.
The important distinction is that
the "container" is distinct from the "component" being styled.
Authors can query one to style the other.

## Non-goals

Modern layouts provide a related problem
with slightly different constraints.
When using grid layout, for example,
available grid-track size can change in ways
that are difficult to describe based on viewport sizes --
such as shrinking & growing in regular intervals
as new columns are added or removed
from a repeating `auto-fit`/`auto-fill` grid.

In this case there is no external "container" element to query
for an accurate sense of available space.

There is a [reasonable workaround](#component-in-a-responsive-grid-track),
but an ideal solution might look more like
Brian Kardell's [`switch()` proposal][switch] --
which allows a limited set of properties
to query the space available,
rather than any explicit container.
It would be good to consider these approaches in tandem.

Improvements to flexbox & grid --
such as
[indefinite grid spans](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/388)
or [first / last keywords](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/2402) --
could also improve on the existing flexibility
of those tools.

And finally,
authors often want to _smoothly interpolate values_
as the context changes,
rather than toggling them at breakpoints.
That would require a way
to describe context-based animations,
with breakpoint-like keyframes.

## Proposed Solutions

### Single-axis containment (`inline-size` & related values)

_This is a proposed change to the
[CSS Containment Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/),
specifically
[size containment](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#containment-size)._

In order for container-queries to work in a performant way,
authors will need to define container elements
with explicit containment on their layout and queried-dimensions.
This can be done with the existing `contain` property,
using the `size` and `layout` values:

```css
.container {
  contain: size layout;
}
```

While that will work for some use-cases,
the majority of web layout
is managed through constraints
on a _single (often inline) axis_.
Intrinsic sizing on the cross (often block) axis
is required to allow for changes in content, font size, etc.

I'm proposing new single-axis values for `contain`,
starting with `inline-size`:

```css
.inline-container {
  contain: inline-size;
}
```

This is both the most common use-case,
and the most likely to be implementable.
If we find that it's also possible to support
1D containment on the block axis,
we should also support the `block-size` logical value,
and `width`/`height` physical values:

```css
.block-container {
  contain: block-size;
}

.width-container {
  contain: width;
}

.height-container {
  contain: height;
}
```

Elements with single-axis containment
should have their intrinsic and final layout on the specified axis
determined without any contributions from their children.
In most cases,
that should be the same as current `contain: size` behavior,
only applied to the axis in question.

Of these values,
it is clear that `block-size`
has the fewest use-cases,
and more potential implementation issues.
While I'm not ready to eliminate it immediately,
support for `block-size` would not be required
to make container queries useful.
Since both `width` and `height` values
may refer to the block size in a given instance,
they pose the same potential issues.

See the discussion of
[single-axis containment issues](#single-axis-containment-issues)
for more detail.

### Containment context

Ideally, container queries could be resolved
against the _available space_ for any given element.
Since size and layout containment are required,
we instead need to define the _containment context_
for each element.

I propose that any element with
layout and size containment on a given axis
generates a new _containment context_ in that axis,
which descendants can query against:

```css
.two-axis-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on both axis */
  contain: layout size;
}

.inline-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on the inline axis */
  contain: layout inline-size;
}

.block-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on the block axis */
  contain: layout block-size;
}
```

When size-containment is only available on a single axis,
queries on the cross-axis will not resolve
against that query context.

When no containment context is established,
there should be a fallback akin to the
_Initial Containing Block_
which queries resolve against.

### Container queries (`@container`)

This could be added to a future level
of the [CSS Conditional Rules Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-conditional-3/).
Unless otherwise noted,
`@container` should follow the established specifications
for _conditional group rules_.

The `@container` rule can be used
to style elements based on their immediate _containment context_,
and uses a similar syntax to existing media queries:

```css
/* @container <container-query-list> { <stylesheet> } */
@container (inline-size > 45em) {
  .media-object {
    grid-template: "img content" auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

This would target
any `.media-object` whose
_containment context_
(nearest ancestor with containment applied)
is greater-than `45em`.
When no containment context is established,
the _Initial Containing Block_ can be used
to resolve the query.

Unlike media-queries,
each element that is targeted by a conditional group rule
will need to resolve the query
against its own containment context.
Multiple elements targeted by the same selector
within the same group
may still resolve differently
based on context.
Consider the following CSS & HTML together:

```css
/* css */
section {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}

div {
  background: red;
}

@container (inline-size > 500px) {
  div {
    background: yellow;
  }
}

@container (inline-size > 1000px) {
  div {
    background: green;
  }
}
```

```html
<!-- html -->
<section style="width: 1500px">
  <!-- container 1 -->
  <div>green background</div>

  <section style="width: 50%">
    <!-- container 2 (nested) -->
    <div>yellow background (resolves against container 2)</div>
  </section>
</section>
<section style="width: 400px">
  <!-- container 3 -->
  <div>red background</div>
</section>
```

#### Container features

Like media-queries,
`@container` needs a well defined list of "features"
that can be queried.
The most essential container features
are the contained dimensions:

- physical dimensions: `width` / `height`
- logical dimensions: `inline-size` / `block-size`

When containment is available on both axis,
we might also be able to query
dimensional relationships such as:

- `aspect-ratio`
- `orientation`

Since container queries resolve against
styled elements in the DOM,
it may also be possible to query other
aspects of the container's computed style?

- `inline-content-box`
- `font-size`
- etc.

This needs more discussion and fleshing-out.

#### Container query list

Like media-queries,
container-queries can be combined in a list,
using the same syntax
and following the same logic as media-query-lists:

> A media query list is true if any of its component media queries are true,
> and false only if all of its component media queries are false."
>
> --[Media Queries 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/mediaqueries-4/#mq-list)

## Key scenarios

### Modular components in any container

Page layouts often provide different layout "areas"
that can act as containers for their descendant elements.
These can be nested in more complex ways,
but let's start with a sidebar and main content:

```html
<body>
  <main>...</main>
  <aside>...</aside>
</body>
```

We can establish a responsive layout,
and declare each of these areas as
a _containment context_ for responsive components:

```css
body {
  display: grid;
  grid-template: "main" auto "aside" auto / 100%;
}

@media (inline-size > 40em) {
  body {
    grid-template: "aside main" auto / 1fr 3fr;
  }
}

main,
aside {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}
```

Now components can move cleanly
between the two areas --
responding to container dimensions
without concern for the overall layout.
For example, some responsive defaults
on typographic elements:

```css
h2 {
  font-size: 120%;
}

@container (inline-size > 40em) {
  h2 {
    font-size: calc(130% + 0.5vw);
  }
}
```

Or "media objects" that respond to available space:

```css
.media-object {
  grid-template: "img" auto "content" auto / 100%;
}

@container (inline-size > 45em) {
  .media-object {
    grid-template: "img content" auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

### Components with internal containers

A more complex component,
like a calendar,
might reference external context
while also defining nested containers:

```html
<section class="calendar">
  <div class="day">
    <article class="event">...</article>
    <article class="event">...</article>
  </div>
  <div class="day">...</div>
  <div class="day">...</div>
</section>
```

```css
.day {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}

/* despite having different containers, these could share a query */
@container (inline-size > 40em) {
  /* queried against external page context */
  .calendar {
    grid-template: repeat(7, 1fr);
  }

  .day {
    border: thin solid silver;
    padding: 1em;
  }

  /* queried against the day */
  .event {
    grid-template: "img content" auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

### Component in a responsive grid track

In some situations,
there is no clear "container" element
defining the available space.
Consider the following HTML & CSS:

```html
<section class="card-grid">
  <div class="card">...</div>
  <div class="card">...</div>
  <div class="card">...</div>
  <div class="card">...</div>
</section>
```

```css
.card-grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(20em, 1fr));
}

.card {
  display: grid;
  /* we want to change this value based on the track size */
  grid-template: "image" auto "content" 1fr "footer" auto / 100%;
}
```

The size of `.card-grid` does not
accurately reflect the available space for a given card,
but there is no other external "container"
that `.card` can use to adjust the `grid-template`.

Authors using this proposal
would need to add an extra wrapping element --
so that the card component has an external track-sized container to query:

```html
<section class="card-grid">
  <div class="card-container"><div class="card">...</div></div>
  <div class="card-container"><div class="card">...</div></div>
  <div class="card-container"><div class="card">...</div></div>
  <div class="card-container"><div class="card">...</div></div>
</section>
```

```css
/* the outer element can get containment… */
.card-container {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}

/* which gives .card something to query against */
@container (inline-size > 30em) {
  .card {
    grid-template: "image content" 1fr "image footer" auto / 1fr 3fr;
  }
}
```

There are already many similar situations in CSS layout --
so this might be a viable solution for most use-cases --
but the extra markup is not ideal.

### Combining media & container queries

In many cases,
container queries would replace
existing media-queries --
making the same underlying goals
more clear and reliable.

Often media-queries will remain in place
for managing page-wide concerns,
like responsive font sizing
or outer page layouts.
Often I expect the layout areas
generated by media-queries
to become containers for their descendant components.
As discussed above:

```css
body {
  display: grid;
  grid-template: "main" auto "aside" auto / 100%;
}

@media (inline-size > 40em) {
  body {
    grid-template: "aside main" auto / 1fr 3fr;
  }
}

main,
aside {
  contain: layout inline-size;
}
```

But there are also situations
where an author might want to query
container width,
along with viewport height.
This allows a design to respond to both dimensions,
without requiring containment on both axis,
or a defined container height:

```css
@media (height > 35em) {
  @container (width > 40em) {
    .card {
      grid-template: "img    header" auto
                     "img    main" 1fr
                     "footer footer" auto
                    / minmax(15em, 1fr) 3fr;
    }
  }
}
```

Beyond basic dimensions,
it's likely that container queries
will also be combined with queries of
media type, interface, or preferences.
For example,
a container query that is specific to print media:

```css
@media print {
  @container (width > 20em) {
    .card { /* ... */ }
  }
}
```

## Detailed design discussion & alternatives

### Single-axis containment issues

There are two known situations in CSS
where changes on the block-axis
can have an impact on the inline-axis layout:

1. When an ancestor of the contained element has `auto` scrolling,
   extra cross-axis size can cause scrollbars
   to appear on the contained-axis.
   This is only an issue when all three are true:

   - Scrollbars are part of the layout flow (they are not overlaid)
   - Overflow on the cross-axis is set to `auto` on _any ancestor_
   - The contained size is impacted by the size of that ancestor

2. Block-axis percentage padding & margins
   are resolved relative to the inline available size.
   That would cause issues when:

   - Containment is on the block-axis
   - Any ancestor has inline-size determined by contents
     (float+auto, min-content, max-content, etc)
   - Any intermediate ancestor has:
     - box-sizing of border-box
     - height determined by the outer ancestor
     - % padding on the block-axis
       (so inner-height decreases as outer-width increases)
   - The container block-size is impacted
     by the inner-size of that ancestor

   See
   [contain-y comment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031#issuecomment-379463428))
   and related
   [codepen demo](https://codepen.io/anon/pen/aYQLvV?editors=1100).

   That issue is most likely to occur
   when containing the block-axis,
   but nested writing modes
   can flip the impacted axis
   ([contain-x with writing modes](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031#issuecomment-722980450)).

There are likely more issues
that would be revealed during implementation --
but I expect the number to remain low.

These are not entirely new issues.
The sizing/layout specs all have
module-specific caveats for handling
percentages based on available size.
The proposal is to begin prototyping this feature,
and attempt to address each issue as they arise --
using similar workarounds.
For example:

- For the sake of determining auto scrollbars on ancestors,
  the container contributes an infinite cross-axis size
  (always trigger the scrollbar).
  This is probably the more common edge-case,
  but in many cases auto-scrollbars imply an element
  has containable size on the cross-axis --
  so authors could avoid this by using 2D size containment in those cases?
- For the sake of resolving percentage-padding on the contained axis,
  always resolve to auto.
  This seems to be the existing first-pass behavior
  in many cases where an element has unknown size.
  Another option would be to drop
  `block-size` from the proposal.

Those are not final solutions,
but examples for how we might be able to
solve each case as it arises.

### Implicit vs explicit containers

In conversations leading to this proposal,
there has been some concern about the dangers
of establishing context _implicitly_
based on the value of `contain`.
Similar behavior for positioning & stacking
has sometimes been confusing for authors.

[David Baron's proposal][dbaron-cq]
included a selector for querying a container
more explicitly:

```css
/* syntax */
@container <selector> (<container-media-query>)? {
  /* ... */
}

/* example */
@container .media-object (inline-size > 45em) {
  .media-object {
    grid-template: "img content" auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

Since all known use-cases attempt to query
the _most immediate available space_,
I don't see any need for querying containers
with an explicit syntax,
or any way to "skipping over" one container to query the next.

Adding a selector to the query would also raise new problems:

- Explicitly targeted queries are less modular,
  so components would not be able to query
  _whatever space they happen to be in_.
- It adds potential confusion about
  what selectors are allowed in the block --
  since authors would not be able to style the container itself.

However,
it might be helpful to consider
a more explicit way of defining the containers initially,
to make this more clear for authors --
such as `query`, `inline-query`, & `block-query` values
that would apply both layout and size containment.
This needs more discussion & consideration.

### Combining scope with container queries

David Baron's proposal also uses
the explicit container selector
to attach the concept of `scope`
to containers --
only matching selectors inside the query
against a subtree of the DOM.

This might be useful
for use-cases where a component both:

- Establishes its own containment context, and
- Establishes its own selector scope

But in my exploration of use-cases,
it seems more common that components
will want to query _external_ context,
while establishing _internal_ scope.

There is also a mis-match
where authors expect to style the root element of a given scope,
but should not be able to style the root of a container-query.

For those reasons,
I think the two features --
container queries and scope --
should remain distinct,
and be solved separately.

### @-Rule or pseudo-class?

Many proposals
& Javascript implementations
use a pseudo-class
rather than an @-rule.

```css
/* pseudo-class */
.selector:container(<query >) {
  /* ... */
}
```

I think the @-rule block provides several advantages:

- The @-rule syntax matches more closely
  with existing conditional rules,
  and builds on existing query-list syntax.
- It's likely that a responsive component
  will have multiple moving parts,
  and each might require unique selectors
  based on the same query.
  These can be grouped in an @-rule.

The nesting syntax might help resolve the latter,
since these would likely have the same meaning:

```css
@container (inline-size < 40em) {
  & .card { /* ... */ }
}

.card:container(inline-size < 40em) {
  /* ... */
}
```

There's even a potential advantage here,
for specifying which part of a complex selector
should resolve the query:

```css
.card:container(inline-size < 40em) {
  & h2 { /* nesting syntax... */ }
}
```

That's not easily represented
by any `@container` syntax.
(David Baron's selector argument doesn't match
the querying element, but the queried container)

### Other questions to explore

- Is it possible to apply containment within a container query?
  In what cases might that lead to cyclic dependencies?
- Will a default root fallback container feel like expected behavior,
  or should we require explicit containment in order to match queries?
- Are there special considerations required for a shadow-DOM `@container`
  to resolve queries against contained host element?

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

- Chromium : Positive --
  Google was involved in developing this proposal
- Gecko : No signals
- Webkit : No signals

## References & acknowledgements

This proposal is based on the previous work of many people:

- Brian Kardell: [All Them Switches][switch]
- David Baron: [Thoughts on an implementable path forward][dbaron-cq]
- Mat Marquis: [A rough proposal for syntax](https://github.com/WICG/container-queries/issues/2)
- Matthew Dean: [2019 Proposal/Solution for Container Queries](https://github.com/WICG/container-queries/issues/12)
- Viktor Hubert: [Container Query Plugin](https://github.com/ZeeCoder/container-query/blob/master/docs/syntax.md#Queries)
- WICG: [Use Cases and Requirements](https://wicg.github.io/cq-usecases/)
- And more: [Who is Working on Container Queries](http://whoisworkingoncontainerqueries.com/)

Thanks also for valuable feedback and advice from:

- Adam Argyle
- Amelia Bellamy-Royds
- Anders Hartvoll Ruud
- Chris Coyier
- Christopher Kirk-Nielsen
- Eric Portis
- Ethan Marcotte
- Florian Rivoal
- Geoff Graham
- Gregory Wild-Smith
- Ian Kilpatrick
- Jen Simmons
- Kenneth Rohde Christiansen
- Lea Verou
- Martin Auswöger
- Martine Dowden
- Mike Riethmuller
- Morten Stenshorne
- Nicole Sullivan
- Rune Lillesveen
- Scott Jehl
- Scott Kellum
- Tab Atkins
- Theresa O’Connor
- Una Kravets

## Changelog

### 2021.03.26

- NOTE: CSSWG Resolution and link to Containment Level 3
- NOTE: Chrome experimental prototype information
- NOTE: Link to demos & articles

### 2021.01.29

- ADD `width` & `height` physical-dimension containment
- EXAMPLES of media & container queries used together
