---
title: TAG Explainer (WIP)
manual_toc: true
eleventyNavigation:
  key: query-explainer
  title: TAG Explainer (WIP)
  parent: container-queries
---

_Based on the
[TAG Explainer Template](https://github.com/w3ctag/w3ctag.github.io/blob/master/explainers.md)_

## Authors

- Miriam Suzanne
- ???

## Participate

CSSWG Issues:
- [Single-Axis Containment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031)

## Table of Contents

<!-- generated by VSCode Markdown All-In-One extension -->

- [Authors](#authors)
- [Participate](#participate)
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Goals](#goals)
- [Non-goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposed Features & Syntax](#proposed-features--syntax)
  - [Single-axis containment (`inline-size` & `block-size` values)](#single-axis-containment-inline-size--block-size-values)
  - [Containment context](#containment-context)
  - [Container queries (`@container`)](#container-queries-container)
    - [Container features](#container-features)
    - [Container query list](#container-query-list)
- [@@@ Key scenarios](#-key-scenarios)
  - [@@@ Scenario 1](#-scenario-1)
  - [@@@ Scenario 2](#-scenario-2)
- [Detailed design discussion & alternatives](#detailed-design-discussion--alternatives)
  - [Single-axis containment issues](#single-axis-containment-issues)
  - [Implicit vs explicit containers](#implicit-vs-explicit-containers)
  - [Combining scope with container queries](#combining-scope-with-container-queries)
  - [(???) Interleaving layout & style](#-interleaving-layout--style)
  - [@-Rule or pseudo-class?](#-rule-or-pseudo-class)
- [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder-feedback--opposition)
- [References & acknowledgements](#references--acknowledgements)

## Introduction

Media-queries allow an author to make style changes
based on the overall viewport dimensions --
making responsive design possible in CSS.
But in many cases,
authors are styling modular components
that might appear in a wide variety of contexts within a page,
and there is currently no way to query the available dimensions
based on that context.
This proposal would allow an author to query
the dimensions of a container element
for conditional styling of descendants.

This solution works by applying size & layout containment
to the queried elements.
Any element with both size & layout containment
can be queried using a new `@continer` rule,
with similar syntax to existing media-queries.
Currently, size containment is all-or-nothing.
In order to make that less restrictive for authors,
we are also proposing `inline-size` & `block-size` values
for the `contain` property.

## Goals

Discussion of Container/Element Queries
go back at least a decade,
and have remained one of the more heavily
requested and discussed CSS features
over that period.

There are two common cases
where media queries become particularly problematic:

- Authors want to describe components
  that can exist in different contexts --
  like a sidebar, or the main content area --
  and respond to the size of each context
  without needing to explicitly plan
  for eery possible combination
  of containers and viewport sizes
- When using flexbox and grid layouts,
  available grid-track size can change in ways
  that are difficult to describe based on viewport sizes --
  such as shrinking & growing in regular intervals
  as new columns are added or removed from the grid.

And several common example use-cases
that rely on context-relative styling:

- "Card" layouts often shift their orientation
  based on available space --
  with an image at the top in narrow context,
  moving to the side when there is available space.
- Calendar layouts often shift from list to grid view
  based on available space --
  with nested "events" that need to respond
  to the available space within a single day.
- When setting type,
  authors want to control font-size, line-length, and line-height
  in consistent relationships --
  based on the available space.

For example use-cases, see:

- [Phil Walton's Responsive Components][demo],
- [Typetura](https://typetura.com/) fluid typography
for examples.

[demo]: https://philipwalton.github.io/responsive-components/#overview

## Non-goals

This is not an exclusive solution
to all "responsive component" issues.
There are several other interesting discussions
that would complement this approach --
and solve different but overlapping use-cases:

- Brian Kardell's [`switch()` proposal][switch]
  would provide a value-level condition statement
  based on parent element context,
  without requiring any containment from authors.
  There are some simpler use-cases
  (like changing a single grid-template),
  where that might be a more compact and flexible option for authors.
- At-rule query blocks require an author to define
  external "breakpoints" for change,
  while flexbox & grid provide more intrinsic
  tools that adapt a layout based on both context & content.
  There might be ways to expand on those existing specifications
  to help make components even more intrinsically responsive.
- With both media- and container-queries,
  authors often want the ability to interpolate a value
  from one breakpoint to the next.
  That is especially useful for describing
  changes in typography --
  with fluid text-sizing, line-heights, and line-lengths
  based on available viewport or container dimensions.

[switch]: https://bkardell.com/blog/AllThemSwitches.html

## Proposed Features & Syntax

### Single-axis containment (`inline-size` & `block-size` values)

_This is a proposed change to the
[CSS Containment Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/),
specifically
[size containment](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain/#containment-size)._

In order for container-queries to work in a performant way,
authors will need to apply both `size` and `layout` containment
to any element being queried.
In particular,
container elements will need size containment
_on the axis being queried_.

The majority of web layout
is managed through constraints
on a single (often inline) axis,
with intrinsic sizing on the cross (often block) axis.
That flexibility on the cross-axis is required
to allow for changes in content, font size, etc.
While there are some situations where
sizes are extrinsic (and containable) on both axis,
making 2D containment a pre-requisite for container-queries
would eliminate the vast majority of use-cases.

We're proposing two new single-axis values:

```css
.inline-container {
  contain: inline-size;
}

.block-container {
  contain: block-size;
}
```

Elements with `<axis>-size` containment
should have their intrinsic and final layout
on the specified axis
determined without any contributions from their children.
In most cases,
that should be the same as current `contain: size` behavior,
only applied to a single axis.

### Containment context

Ideally, container queries could be resolved
against the _available space_ for any given element.
Since size and layout containment are required,
we instead need to define the _containment context_
for each element.

We propose that any element with
layout and size containment on a given axis
generates a new _containment context_ in that axis,
which descendants can query against:

```css
.two-axis-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on both axis */
  contain: layout size;
}

.inline-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on the inline axis */
  contain: layout inline-size;
}

.block-container {
  /* establishes a new containment context on the block axis */
  contain: layout block-size;
}
```

### Container queries (`@container`)

This could be added to a future level
of the [CSS Conditional Rules Module](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-conditional-3/).
Unless otherwise noted,
`@container` should follow the established specifications
for _conditional group rules_.

The `@container` rule can be used
to style elements based on their immediate _containment context_,
and uses a similar syntax to existing media queries:

```css
/* @container <container-query-list> { <stylesheet> } */
@container (width > 45em) {
  .media-object {
    grid-template: 'img content' auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

This would target
any `.media-object` who's
_containment context_
(nearest ancestor with containment applied)
is greater-than `45em`.
When no containment context is established,
the _Initial Containing Block_ can be used
to resolve the query.

Unlike media-queries,
each element that is targeted by a conditional group rule
will need to resolve the query
against it's own containment context.
Multiple elements targeted by the same selector
within the same group
may still resolve differently
based on context.
Consider the following CSS & HTML together:

```css
/* css */
section { contain: layout inline-size; }

div { background: red; }

@container (width > 500px) {
  div { background: yellow; }
}

@container (width > 1000px) {
  div { background: green; }
}
```

```html
<!-- html -->
<section style="width: 1500px"> <!-- container 1 -->
  <div>green background</div>

  <section style="width: 50%"> <!-- container 2 (nested) -->
    <div>yellow background (resolves against container 2)</div>
  </section>
</section>
<section style="width: 400px"> <!-- container 3 -->
  <div>red background</div>
</section>
```

#### Container features

Like media-queries,
`@container` needs a well defined list of "features"
that can be queried.
The most essential container features
are the contained dimensions:

- physical dimensions: `width` / `height`
- logical dimensions: `inline-size` / `block-size`

When containment is available on both axis,
we might also be able to query
dimensional relationships such as:

- `aspect-ratio`
- `orientation`

Since container queries resolve against
styled elements in the DOM,
it may also be possible to query other
aspects of the container's computed style?

- `inline-content-box`
- `font-size`
- etc.

This needs more discussion and fleshing-out.

#### Container query list

Like media-queries,
container-queries can be combined in a list,
using the same syntax
and following the same logic as media-query-lists:

> A media query list is true if any of its component media queries are true,
> and false only if all of its component media queries are false."
>
> --[Media Queries 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/mediaqueries-4/#mq-list)

## @@@ Key scenarios

[If there are a suite of interacting APIs, show how they work together to solve the key scenarios described.]

### @@@ Scenario 1

[Description of the end-user scenario]

```js
// Sample code demonstrating how to use these APIs to address that scenario.
```

### @@@ Scenario 2

[etc.]

## Detailed design discussion & alternatives

### Single-axis containment issues

There are two known situations in CSS
where changes on the block-axis
can have an impact on the inline-axis layout:

1. When an ancestor of the contained element has `auto` scrolling,
   extra cross-axis size can cause scrollbars
   to appear on the contained-axis.
   This is only an issue when all three are true:

   - Scrollbars are part of the layout flow (they are not overlaid)
   - Overflow on the cross-axis is set to `auto` on _any ancestor_
   - The contained size is impacted by the size of that ancestor

2. Block-axis percentage padding & margins
   are resolved relative to the inline available size.
   That would cause issues when:

   - Containment is on the block-axis
   - Any ancestor has inline-size determined by contents
     (float+auto, min-content, max-content, etc)
   - Any intermediate ancestor has:
     - box-sizing of border-box
     - height determined by the outer ancestor
     - % padding on the block-axis
       (so inner-height decreases as outer-width increases)
   - The container block-size is impacted
     by the inner-size of that ancestor

   See
   [contain-y comment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031#issuecomment-379463428))
   and related
   [codepen demo](https://codepen.io/anon/pen/aYQLvV?editors=1100).

   That issue is most likely to occur
   when containing the block-axis,
   but nested writing modes
   can flip the impacted axis
   ([contain-x with writing modes](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1031#issuecomment-722980450)).

There are likely more issues
that would be revealed during implementation --
but we expect the number to remain low.

These are not entirely new issues.
The sizing/layout specs all have
module-specific caveats for handling
percentages based on available size.
Our proposal is to begin prototyping this feature,
and attempt to address each issue as they arise --
using similar workarounds.
For example:

- For the sake of determining auto scrollbars on ancestors,
  the container contributes an infinite cross-axis size
  (always trigger the scrollbar).
  This is probably the more common edge-case,
  but in many cases auto-scrollbars imply an element
  has containable size on the cross-axis --
  so authors could avoid this by using 2D size containment in those cases?
- For the sake of resolving percentage-padding on the contained axis,
  always resolve to auto.
  This seems to be the existing first-pass behavior
  in many cases where an element has unknown size.
  Another option would be to drop
  `block-size` from the proposal.

Those are not final solutions,
but examples for how we might be able to
solve each case as it arises.

### Implicit vs explicit containers

In conversations leading to this proposal,
there has been some concern about the dangers
of establishing context _implicitly_
based on the value of `contain`.
Similar behavior for positioning & stacking
has sometimes been confusing for authors.

[David Baron's proposal](https://github.com/dbaron/container-queries-implementability)
included a selector for querying a container
more explicitly:

```css
/* syntax */
@container <selector> (<container-media-query>)? {
  /* ... */
}

/* example */
@container .media-object (width > 45em) {
  .media-object {
    grid-template: 'img content' auto / auto 1fr;
  }
}
```

Since all known use-cases attempt to query
the _most immediate available space_,
we don't see any need for querying containers
with an explicit syntax,
or any way to "skipping over" one container to query the next.

Adding a selector to the query would also raise new problems:

- Explicitly targeted queries are less modular,
  so components would not be able to query
  _whatever space they happen to be in_.
- It's not clear if the query can be recursive --
  styling the same element that it queries.

However,
it might be helpful to consider
a more explicit way of defining the containers initially,
to make this more clear for authors --
such as `query`, `inline-query`, & `block-query` values
that would apply both layout and size containment.
This needs more discussion & consideration.

### Combining scope with container queries

David Baron's proposal also uses
the explicit container selector
to attach the concept of `scope`
to containers --
only matching selectors inside the query
against a subtree of the DOM.

This might be useful
for use-cases where a component both:

- Establishes it's own containment context, and
- Establishes it's own selector scope

But in our exploration of use-cases,
it seems more common that components
will want to query _external_ context,
while establishing _internal_ scope.

For that reason,
we think the two features --
container queries and scope --
should remain separate.

### (???) Interleaving layout & style

For elements relying on a container query,
internal style calculation would need to happen
_after_ external layout has concluded.

@@@ Do we need to cover this in the explainer?

### @-Rule or pseudo-class?

Many proposals
& Javascript implementations
use a pseudo-class
rather than an @-rule.

```css
/* pseudo-class */
.selector:container(<query>) { /* ... */ }
```

We think the @-rule block provides several advantages:

- The @-rule syntax matches more closely
  with existing conditional rules,
  and builds on existing query-list syntax.
- It's likely that a responsive component
  will have multiple moving parts,
  and each might require unique selectors
  based on the same query.
  These can be grouped in an @-rule.
- We avoid the issues mentioned above
  with having an explicit selector attached to the query.

We also think the syntax can lead to confusion.
It's not immediately clear what these different selectors would mean:

```css
:context(width < 40em) { font-size: small; }
.media-object:context(width < 40em) { font-size: small; }
:context(width < 40em) .media-object { font-size: small; }
```

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

- Chromium : Positive --
  Google was involved in developing this proposal
- Gecko : No signals
- Webkit : No signals

## References & acknowledgements

This proposal is based on the previous work of many people:

- Brian Kardell: [All Them Switches][switch]
- David Baron: [Thoughts on an implementable path forward](https://github.com/dbaron/container-queries-implementability)
- Mat Marquis: [A rough proposal for syntax](https://github.com/WICG/container-queries/issues/2)
- Matthew Dean: [2019 Proposal/Solution for Container Queries](https://github.com/WICG/container-queries/issues/12)
- Viktor Hubert: [Container Query Plugin](https://github.com/ZeeCoder/container-query/blob/master/docs/syntax.md#Queries)
- WICG: [Use Cases and Requirements](https://wicg.github.io/cq-usecases/)
- And more: [Who is Working on Container Queries](http://whoisworkingoncontainerqueries.com/)

Thanks also for valuable feedback and advice from:

- Amelia Bellamy-Royds
- Anders Hartvoll Ruud
- Chris Coyier
- Christopher Kirk-Nielsen
- Eric Portis
- Ethan Marcotte
- Florian Rivoal
- Geoff Graham
- Gregory Wild-Smith
- Ian Kilpatrick
- Jen Simmons
- Martin Auswöger
- Martine Dowden
- Mike Riethmuller
- Morten Stenshorne
- Nicole Sullivan
- Rune Lillesveen
- Scott Jehl
- Scott Kellum
- Tab Atkins
- Theresa O’Connor
